
| [ 03.c3 Handling the UI ](/packtpub/2307a_modern_android_13_230811/03_c3-handling_the_ui) | 👈 04.c4 Navigation in Modern Android Development 👉 |  [ 05.c5 Using DataStore to ](/packtpub/2307a_modern_android_13_230811/05_c5-using_datastore_to) |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|

Book Title:` Modern Android 13 Development Cookbook `
Short Description:` By Madona S. Wambua Jul 2023 322 pages `
Link:` https://subscription.packtpub.com/book/mobile/9781803235578/4 `
create:` 2023-08-30 수 08:27:47 `

PAGE INFO Title:` 04.c4 Navigation in Modern Android Development `
Book Path:` packtpub/2307a_modern_android_13_230811/04_c4-navigation_in_modern `
md Name:` 04.c4-navigation_in_modern.md `

# Navigation in Modern Android Development

In Android development, navigation is the interaction that allows your Android application users to navigate to, from, and back out from the different screens within your app, an action that is very vital in the mobile ecosystem.

Jetpack navigation has simplified navigation between screens, and in this chapter, we will learn how to implement navigation with a simple view click, from the bottom navigation bar, which is most commonly used, by navigating with arguments, and more.

In this chapter, we’ll cover the following recipes:

Implementing a bottom navigation bar using navigation destinations
Navigating to a new screen in Compose
Navigating with arguments
Creating deep links for destinations
Writing tests for navigation
Technical requirements
The complete source code for this chapter can be found at https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Modern-Android-13-Development-Cookbook/tree/main/chapter_four.

Implementing a bottom navigation bar using navigation destinations
In Android development, having a bottom navigation bar is very common; it helps inform your users that there are different sections in your application. In addition, other apps opt to include a navigation drawer activity, which holds a profile and additional information about the application.

An excellent example of an app that utilizes both – a navigation drawer and bottom navigation – is Twitter. It is also important to mention that some companies prefer to have a top navigation bar as a preference. In addition, others such as Google Play Store have both bottom and drawer navigation.

Getting ready
Create a new Android project with your preferred editor or Android Studio, or you can use any project from previous recipes.

How to do it…
In this recipe, we are going to create a new project and call it BottomNavigationBarSample:

After creating our new empty Activity BottomNavigationBarSample project, we will start by adding the required navigation dependency in build.gradle, and then sync the project:
implementation 'android.navigation:navigation-compose:2.5.2'

Copy

Explain
As noticed in a previous new project, when you create a new project, there is code that comes with it, the Greeting() function; you can go ahead and delete that code.
After deleting that code, let us go ahead and create a sealed class in the main package directory and call it Destination.kt, where we will define our route string, icon: Int, and title: String for our bottom navigation items:
sealed class Destination(val route: String, val icon: Int, val title: String) {...}

Copy

Explain
Strictly speaking, we might not need the sealed class, but it is a nicer way to implement navigation. A sealed class in Kotlin represents a restricted class hierarchy that provides more control over inheritance. Alternatively, you can think of it as a class that, in its value, can have one of the types from a limited set, but it cannot have any other types.

Inside the sealed class, now let’s go ahead and create our destinations. For our sample, we will assume we are creating a budgeting app. Hence, the destinations we can have are Transactions, Budgets, Tasks, and Settings. See the next step on how to get the icons; in addition, you will need to import them. For good practice, you can extract the String resource and save it in the String XML file. You can try this as a small exercise:
sealed class Destination(val route: String, val icon: Int, val title: String) {

Copy

Explain
    object Transaction : Destination(

Copy

Explain
        route = "transactions", icon =

Copy

Explain
            R.drawable.ic_baseline_wallet,

Copy

Explain
            title = "Transactions"

Copy

Explain
    )

Copy

Explain
    object Budgets : Destination(

Copy

Explain
        route = "budget", icon =

Copy

Explain
            R.drawable.ic_baseline_budget,

Copy

Explain
            title = "Budget"

Copy

Explain
    )

Copy

Explain
    object Tasks : Destination(route = "tasks", icon =

Copy

Explain
        R.drawable.ic_add_task, title = "Tasks")

Copy

Explain
    object Settings : Destination(

Copy

Explain
        route = "settings", icon =

Copy

Explain
            R.drawable.ic_settings,

Copy

Explain
            title = "Settings"

Copy

Explain
    )

Copy

Explain
    companion object {

Copy

Explain
        val toList = listOf(Transaction, Budgets,

Copy

Explain
        Tasks, Settings)

Copy

Explain
    }

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
For the icons, you can access them easily but clicking on the resource folder (res), then navigating to Vector Assets | Clip Art, which will launch and bring up free icons that you can use, as shown in Figure 4.1:
Figure 4.1 – How to access Vector Asset
Figure 4.1 – How to access Vector Asset

You can also upload an SVG file and access it through Asset Studio. For more icons, you can check out this link: https://fonts.google.com/icons.
Figure 4.2 – Asset Studio
Figure 4.2 – Asset Studio

Now, for the destinations we just added, let’s go ahead and add dummy text to verify that, indeed, when we navigate, we are on the right screen. Create a new file and name it AppContent.kt. Inside AppContent, we will add our Transaction function, which will be our home screen, where new users enter the app the first time; then later, they can navigate to other screens:
@Composable

Copy

Explain
fun Transaction(){

Copy

Explain
    Column(

Copy

Explain
        modifier = Modifier

Copy

Explain
            .fillMaxSize()

Copy

Explain
            .wrapContentSize(Alignment.Center)

Copy

Explain
    ) {

Copy

Explain
    ...

Copy

Explain
    }

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
Go ahead and add the remaining three screens, Task, Budget, and Settings, using the same composable pattern.
We now need to create a bottom navigation bar composable and tell the Composable function how to react when clicked, and also restore the state when re-selecting a previously selected item:
@Composable

Copy

Explain
fun BottomNavigationBar(navController: NavController, appItems: List<Destination>) {

Copy

Explain
    BottomNavigation(

Copy

Explain
        backgroundColor = colorResource(id =

Copy

Explain
            R.color.purple_700),

Copy

Explain
            contentColor = Color.White

Copy

Explain
    ) {

Copy

Explain
    ...

Copy

Explain
    }

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
Now, let’s go to MainActivity and create NavHost and a few composable functions, AppScreen(), AppNavigation(), and BottomNavigationBar(). Each nav controller must be associated with a single nav host composable because it connects the controller with a nav graph that helps specify the composable directions:
@Composable

Copy

Explain
fun AppNavigation(navController: NavHostController) {

Copy

Explain
    NavHost(navController, startDestination =

Copy

Explain
    Destination.Transaction.route) {

Copy

Explain
        composable(Destination.Transaction.route) {

Copy

Explain
            Transaction()

Copy

Explain
        }

Copy

Explain
        composable(Destination.Budgets.route) {

Copy

Explain
            Budget()

Copy

Explain
        }

Copy

Explain
        composable(Destination.Tasks.route) {

Copy

Explain
            Tasks()

Copy

Explain
        }

Copy

Explain
        composable(Destination.Settings.route) {

Copy

Explain
            Settings()

Copy

Explain
        }

Copy

Explain
    }

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
Finally, let’s go ahead and glue everything together by creating another composable function and calling it AppScreen(). We will call this function inside setContent in the onCreate() function:
@Composable

Copy

Explain
fun AppScreen() {

Copy

Explain
    val navController = rememberNavController()

Copy

Explain
    Scaffold(

Copy

Explain
        bottomBar = {

Copy

Explain
            BottomNavigationBar(navController =

Copy

Explain
            navController, appItems =

Copy

Explain
            Destination.toList) },

Copy

Explain
        content = { padding ->

Copy

Explain
            Box(modifier = Modifier.padding(padding))

Copy

Explain
            {

Copy

Explain
                AppNavigation(navController =

Copy

Explain
                    navController)

Copy

Explain
            }

Copy

Explain
        }

Copy

Explain
    )

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
Then, call this created function inside setContent{}; the import should be import androidx.activity.compose.setContent, based on the fact that sometimes it might happen that you import the wrong one. Run the application. You will notice a screen with four tabs, and when you select a tab, the selected one gets highlighted, as shown in Figure 4.3:
Figure 4.3 – The bottom na﻿vigation bar
Figure 4.3 – The bottom navigation bar

How it works…
In Compose, navigation has a crucial term called route. The key is the string that defines the pathway to your composable. The key basically is the source of truth – or think of it as a deep link that takes you to a specific destination, and each destination should have a unique route.

Furthermore, each destination should consist of a unique key route. In our example, we added icons and a title. The icons, as seen in Figure 4.3, show what the bottom navigation entails, and the title describes the specific screen we are browsing at that exact time. In addition, these are optional and only needed for some routes.

NavController() is the main API for our navigation component, and it keeps track of every back stack entry for the composables that make up the screens in our application and the state of each screen. We created this using rememberNavController: as we mentioned in the previous chapter, remember, as the name suggests, remembers the value; in this instance, we are remembering NavController:

val navController = rememberNavController()

Copy

Explain
NavHost(), on the other hand, requires the NavController() previously created through rememberNavController() and the destination route of the entry point of our graph. In addition, rememberNavController() returns NavHostController, which is a subclass of NavController() that offers some additional APIs that NavHost requires.

This is very similar to how Android developers build navigation before composing fragments. The steps include creating a bottom navigation menu with the menu items, as shown in the following code block:

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<menu xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android">
    <item
        android:id="@+id/transaction_home"
        android:icon="@drawable/card"
        android:title="@string/transactions"/>
    <item
         android:id="@+id/budget_home"
         android:icon="@drawable/ic_shopping_basket_black_
             24dp"
         android:title="@string/budgets"
    />
...
</menu>

Copy

Explain
Then, we create another resource in the navigation package that points to the screens (fragments):

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<navigation xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
    app:startDestination="@+id/transaction_home">
    <fragment
        android:id="@+id/transaction_home"
        android:name="com.fragments.TransactionsFragment"
        android:label="@string/title_transcation"
        tools:layout="@layout/fragment_transactions" >
        <action
            android:id="@+id/action_transaction_home_to_
                budget_home"
            app:destination="@id/budget_home" />
    </fragment>
    <fragment
        android:id="@+id/budget_home"
        android:name="com.fragments.BudgetsFragment"
        android:label="@string/title_budget"
        tools:layout="@layout/fragment_budget" >
        <action
            android:id="@+id/action_budget_home_to_tasks_
                home"
            app:destination="@id/tasks_home" />
    </fragment>
</navigation>

Copy

Explain
Navigating to a new screen in Compose
We will build a register screen prompt on our login page for registering first-time users of our application. This is a standard pattern because we need to save the user’s credentials so that the next time they log in to our application, we just log them in without registering again.

Getting ready
You should have completed the previous recipe, Implementing a bottom navigation bar using navigation destinations, before getting started with this one.

How to do it…
In this recipe, we will need to use our SampleLogin project and add a new screen that users can navigate to if it is their first time using the application. This is a typical use case in many applications:

Open your SampleLogin project, create a new sealed class, and call it Destination. To also ensure we maintain great packaging, add this class to util. Also, just like the bottom bar, we will have a route, but this time, we do not need any icons or titles:
sealed class Destination (val route: String){

Copy

Explain
    object Main: Destination("main_route")

Copy

Explain
    object LoginScreen: Destination("login_screen")

Copy

Explain
    object RegisterScreen:

Copy

Explain
        Destination("register_screen")

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
After creating the destinations, we now need to go ahead and add clickable text in LoginContent to ask users whether it is their first time using the application. They should click Register. Then, we can navigate to RegisterContent. You can open the project by checking out the Technical requirements section if you need to refer to any step:
@Composable

Copy

Explain
fun LoginContent(

Copy

Explain
    ...

Copy

Explain
    onRegister: () -> Unit

Copy

Explain
) {

Copy

Explain
ClickableText(

Copy

Explain
    modifier = Modifier.padding(top = 12.dp),

Copy

Explain
    text = AnnotatedString(stringResource(id =

Copy

Explain
        R.string.register)),

Copy

Explain
    onClick = { onRegister.invoke() },

Copy

Explain
    style = TextStyle(

Copy

Explain
       colorResource(id = R.color.purple_700),

Copy

Explain
       fontSize = 16.sp

Copy

Explain
    )

Copy

Explain
)

Copy

Explain
Now, when you click on ClickableText, our clickable text is text that you can click, and it will help users navigate to the registration screen via First-time user? Sign UP. Once you click on this, it should navigate to a different screen where users can now sign up, as shown in Figure 4.4:
Figure 4.4 – A new Register screen
Figure 4.4 – A new Register screen

For the Register screen, you can get the entire code in the Technical requirements section. We will reuse the user input fields that we created and just change the text:
@Composable

Copy

Explain
fun PasswordInputField(

Copy

Explain
    text: String

Copy

Explain
) {

Copy

Explain
    OutlinedTextField(

Copy

Explain
        label = { Text(text = text) },

Copy

Explain
...

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
In MainActivity, we will have a Navigation() function, as follows:
@Composable

Copy

Explain
fun Navigation(navController: NavHostController) {

Copy

Explain
    NavHost(navController, startDestination =

Copy

Explain
    Destination.LoginScreen.route) {

Copy

Explain
        composable(Destination.LoginScreen.route) {

Copy

Explain
            LoginContentScreen(loginViewModel =

Copy

Explain
                hiltViewModel(),

Copy

Explain
            onRegisterNavigateTo = {

Copy

Explain
                navController.navigate(

Copy

Explain
                    Destination.RegisterScreen.route)

Copy

Explain
            })

Copy

Explain
        }

Copy

Explain
        composable(Destination.RegisterScreen.route) {

Copy

Explain
            RegisterContentScreen(registerViewModel =

Copy

Explain
                hiltViewModel())

Copy

Explain
        }

Copy

Explain
    }

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
In PasswordInputField, we will name each input appropriately for reusability:
PasswordInputField(

Copy

Explain
    text = stringResource(id = R.string.password),

Copy

Explain
    authState = uiState,

Copy

Explain
    onValueChanged = onPasswordUpdated,

Copy

Explain
    passwordToggleVisibility =

Copy

Explain
        passwordToggleVisibility)

Copy

Explain
Moreover, you can also navigate to the previous Sign in screen by clicking on the hardware Back button.
Finally, in setContent, we will need to update the code to accommodate the new navigation:
@AndroidEntryPoint

Copy

Explain
class MainActivity : ComponentActivity() {

Copy

Explain
    override fun onCreate(savedInstanceState: Bundle?)

Copy

Explain
    {

Copy

Explain
        super.onCreate(savedInstanceState)

Copy

Explain
        setContent {

Copy

Explain
            SampleLoginTheme {

Copy

Explain
                // A surface container using the

Copy

Explain
                   'background' color from the theme

Copy

Explain
                Surface(

Copy

Explain
                    modifier = Modifier.fillMaxSize(),

Copy

Explain
                    color =

Copy

Explain
                       MaterialTheme.colors.background

Copy

Explain
                ) {

Copy

Explain
                    val navController =

Copy

Explain
                        rememberNavController()

Copy

Explain
                    Navigation(navController =

Copy

Explain
                        navController)

Copy

Explain
                }

Copy

Explain
            }

Copy

Explain
        }

Copy

Explain
    }

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
Run the code and click on the Sign up text, and you should now be taken to a new screen.

How it works…
You will notice that we have just created a different destination entry point, where ClickableText is used to navigate to the newly created screen. Furthermore, in order to navigate to a composable destination in the nav graph, you must use navController.navigate(Destination.RegisterScreen.route), and as mentioned earlier, the string represents the destination route.

In addition, navigate() adds our destination to the back stack by default, but if we need to modify the behavior, we can easily do that by adding additional nav options to our navigate() call.

Suppose you want to work with animations when navigating. In that case, you can easily do that by using the Accompanist library – https://github.com/google/accompanist –which offers a group of libraries that aim to supplement Jetpack Compose with features that are required mainly by developers and are not available yet.

You can utilize enterTransition, which explicitly specifies the animation that runs when you navigate to a particular destination, whereas exitTransition does the opposite:

AnimatedNavHost(
    modifier = Modifier
        .padding(padding),
    navController = navController,
    startDestination = Destination.LoginScreen.route,
    route = Destination.LoginScreen.route,
    enterTransition = { fadeIn(animationSpec = tween(2000)) },
    exitTransition = { fadeOut(animationSpec = tween(200))
    }
)

Copy

Explain
You can also use popEnterTransition, which specifies the animation that runs when the destination re-enters the screen after going through popBackStack(), or popExitTranstion, which does the opposite.

Important note

It is crucial to note a good practice that becomes relevant for hoisting the state is when you expose events from your composable functions to callers in your application that know how to handle that logic properly. In addition, under-the-hood navigation is all state-managed.

See also
For more about AnimatedNavHost, you can find details here: https://google.github.io/accompanist/navigation-animation/.

Navigating with arguments
Passing data between destinations is very vital in Android development. The new Jetpack navigation allows developers to attach data to a navigation operation by defining an argument for a destination. Readers will learn how to pass data between destinations using arguments.

A good use case is, say, you load an API with data and want to show more description on the data you just displayed; you can navigate with unique arguments to the next screen.

Getting ready
We will explore the most common interview project requirement, which is to fetch data from an API and display one screen and add an additional screen for extra points.

Let’s assume the API is the GitHub API, and you want to display all organizations. Then, you want to navigate to another screen and see the number of repositories each company has.

How to do it…
For this recipe, we will look at an example of navigating with arguments as a concept since there is little more to do other than create the basic arguments to pass to utilize an already-built project – SampleLogin:

Let’s go ahead and create SearchScreen, and this screen will have just a search function, EditText, and a column to display the data returned from an API:
SearchScreen(

Copy

Explain
    viewModel = hiltViewModel(),

Copy

Explain
    navigateToRepositoryScreen = { orgName ->

Copy

Explain
        navController.navigate(

Copy

Explain
            Destination.BrowseRepositoryScreen.route +

Copy

Explain
            "/" + orgName

Copy

Explain
        )

Copy

Explain
    }

Copy

Explain
)

Copy

Explain
And now, when setting up navigation to BrowseRepository, you will need to add the following code. This piece of code is for passing a mandatory data parameter from one screen to another, but adding the example of passing an optional argument; a default value will help the user:
composable(

Copy

Explain
    route = Destination.BrowseRepositoryScreen.route +

Copy

Explain
            "/{org_name}",

Copy

Explain
    arguments = listOf(navArgument("org_name") { type

Copy

Explain
        = NavType.StringType }),

Copy

Explain
    enterTransition = { scaleIn(tween(700)) },

Copy

Explain
    exitTransition = { scaleOut(tween(700)) },

Copy

Explain
) {

Copy

Explain
    BrowseRepositoryScreen(

Copy

Explain
        viewModel = hiltViewModel(),

Copy

Explain
    )

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
We also use the enter and exit transition for animations. In this recipe, we have just touched on the concept of navigating with arguments, which can be applied to many projects.

How it works…
When you want to pass an argument to the destination, which is something that might be required, you need to explicitly attach it to the route when initiating the navigate function call, as you can see in the following code snippet:

navController.navigate(Destination.BrowseScreen.route + "/" + orgName)

Copy

Explain
We added an argument placeholder to our route, similar to how we added arguments to a deep link when using the base navigation library.

There is also a list of what the navigation library supports; if you have a different use case, you can look into this document: https://developer.android.com/guide/navigation/navigation-pass-data#supported_argument_types.

Figure 4.5 – Navigation support argument t﻿ype (credit: developers.android.com)
Figure 4.5 – Navigation support argument type (credit: developers.android.com)

There’s more…
There is more to learn about navigation and, for a more thorough way to look into how you can navigate with arguments, retrieve complex data when navigating, and add additional arguments in depth, you can read more here: https://developer.android.com/jetpack/compose/navigation.

Creating deep links for destinations
In Modern Android Development, deep links are very vital. A link that helps you navigate directly to a specific destination within an app is called a deep link. The Navigation component lets you create two types of deep links: explicit and implicit.

Compose navigation supports implicit deep links, which can be part of your Composable functions. It is also fair to mention there is no huge difference between how you would handle these using XML layouts.

Getting ready
Since we don’t have a deep link use case in our application, in this recipe, we will look into how we can utilize the knowledge by learning how to implement implicit deep links.

How to do it…
You can match deep links using a Uniform Resource Locator (URI), intent actions, or Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) types. Furthermore, you can easily specify multiple types that match for a deep link single but remember that the URI argument comparison is always prioritized, followed by the intent action, then the MIME type.

Compose has made it easier for developers to work with deep links. The composable function accepts a parameter list of NavDeepLinks, which can be easily created using the navDeepLink method:

We will start by making the deep link externally available by adding the appropriate intent filter to our AndroidManifest.xml file:
<activity>

Copy

Explain
    <intent-filter>

Copy

Explain
      ...

Copy

Explain
      <data android:scheme="https"

Copy

Explain
      android:host="www.yourcompanieslink.com" />

Copy

Explain
    </intent-filter>

Copy

Explain
</activity>

Copy

Explain
Now in our composable function, we can use the deepLinks parameter, specify the list of navDeepLink, and then pass the URI pattern:
val uri = "www.yourcompanieslink.com"

Copy

Explain
composable(deepLinks = listOf(navDeepLink { uriPattern = "$uri/{id}" }))

Copy

Explain
{...}

Copy

Explain
Please note that navigation will automatically deep-link into that composable when another application triggers the deep link.
Many applications still use launchMode when navigating. This is when using the Navigation Jetpack component, as seen in the following code snippet:

override fun onNewIntent(intent: Intent) {
    super.onNewIntent(intent)
    navigationController.handleDeepLink(intent)
}

Copy

Explain
Finally, you can also utilize deepLinkPendingIntent like any other PendingIntent to start your Android application at the deep link destination.
Important note

When triggering an implicit deep link, the back stack state depends on when the implicit intent was launched with Intent.FLAG_ACTIVITY_NEW_TASK. Furthermore, if the flag is set, the back stack task is cleared and then replaced with the intended deep link destination.

How it works…
In Android development, a deep link refers to a specific destination for the application. For instance, when you invoke the deep link, the link opens up your application’s corresponding destination when a user clicks on the specified link.

This refers to where the link is meant to lead once clicked. The explicit deep link is a single instance that uses PendingIntent to take users to a specific location within your application. A good use case is when using notifications or app widgets.

There’s more…
There is more to learn about deep links; for instance, how to create an explicit deep link. You can learn more about deep links here: https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/deep-linking.

Writing tests for navigation
Now that we have created a new screen for our SampleLogin project, we need to fix the broken test and add new tests for the UI package. If you can recall, in Chapter 3, Handling the UI State in Jetpack Compose and Using Hilt, we did unit tests and not UI tests. This means after adding all the ViewModel instances, our UI tests are now broken. In this recipe, we will fix the failing tests and add a navigation test.

Getting ready
In this recipe, you do not need to create any new project; use the already-created project, SampleLogin.

How to do it…
You can apply these concepts to test the bottom navigation bar we created. Hence, we will not be writing tests for the BottomNavigationBarSample project. Open SampleLogin and navigate to the androidTest package. We will add tests here for the new RegisterScreen() a Composable function, and also fix the broken tests:

Let’s open the LoginContentTest class. Now, let’s move the LoginContent class to a helper class that we will create to help us with testing the UI logic:
@Composable

Copy

Explain
fun contentLoginForTest(

Copy

Explain
    uiState: AuthenticationState =

Copy

Explain
    AuthenticationState(),

Copy

Explain
    onUsernameUpdated : (String) -> Unit = {},

Copy

Explain
    onPasswordUpdated :(String) -> Unit = {},

Copy

Explain
    onLogin : () -> Unit = {},

Copy

Explain
    passwordToggleVisibility: (Boolean) -> Unit = {},

Copy

Explain
    onRegisterNavigateTo: () -> Unit = {}

Copy

Explain
) {

Copy

Explain
    LoginContent(

Copy

Explain
        uiState = uiState,

Copy

Explain
        onUsernameUpdated = onUsernameUpdated,

Copy

Explain
        onPasswordUpdated = onPasswordUpdated,

Copy

Explain
        onLogin = onLogin,

Copy

Explain
        passwordToggleVisibility =

Copy

Explain
            passwordToggleVisibility,

Copy

Explain
        onRegister = onRegisterNavigateTo

Copy

Explain
    )

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
Inside the LoginContentTest class, now, we will replace LoginContent with the newly created contentLoginForTest() function inside the initCompose function:
private fun initCompose() {

Copy

Explain
    composeRuleTest.activity.setContent {

Copy

Explain
        SampleLoginTheme {

Copy

Explain
            contentLoginForTest()

Copy

Explain
            launchRegisterScreenWithNavGraph()

Copy

Explain
        }

Copy

Explain
    }

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
Now that we have fixed the tests, we can now add a test tag for our newly created clickable, TextView:
const val REGISTER_USER = "register_user"

Copy

Explain
Once that is done, we now need to create lateint var NavHostController, and a launchRegisterScreenWithNavGraph function to help us set up the navigation:
private fun launchRegisterScreenWithNavGraph() {

Copy

Explain
    composeRuleTest.activity.setContent {

Copy

Explain
        SampleLoginTheme {

Copy

Explain
            navController = rememberNavController()

Copy

Explain
            NavHost(

Copy

Explain
                navController = navController,

Copy

Explain
                startDestination =

Copy

Explain
                    Destination.LoginScreen.route

Copy

Explain
            ) {

Copy

Explain
                composable(Destination.LoginScreen

Copy

Explain
                .route) {

Copy

Explain
                LoginContentScreen(

Copy

Explain
                onRegisterNavigateTo = {

Copy

Explain
                    navController.navigate(

Copy

Explain
                        Destination.RegisterScreen

Copy

Explain
                        .route)

Copy

Explain
                }, loginViewModel = hiltViewModel())

Copy

Explain
                }

Copy

Explain
                composable(

Copy

Explain
                    Destination.RegisterScreen

Copy

Explain
                    .route) {

Copy

Explain
                        RegisterContentScreen(

Copy

Explain
                            hiltViewModel())

Copy

Explain
                    }

Copy

Explain
            }

Copy

Explain
        }

Copy

Explain
    }

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
You can call the created function inside the initCompose function or in the new test function that we will create.

Now, let’s create a test function and name it assertRegisterClickableButtonNavigatesToRegisterScreen(). In this test case, we will set our route and then use assert when the correct TextView is clicked; we will navigate to the correct destination:
@Test

Copy

Explain
fun assertRegisterClickableButtonNavigatesToRegisterScreen() {

Copy

Explain
    initCompose()

Copy

Explain
    composeRuleTest.onNodeWithTag(

Copy

Explain
        TestTags.LoginContent.REGISTER_USER)

Copy

Explain
            .performClick(

Copy

Explain
    )

Copy

Explain
    val route =

Copy

Explain
        navController.currentDestination?.route

Copy

Explain
    assert(route.equals(

Copy

Explain
        Destination.RegisterScreen.route))

Copy

Explain
}

Copy

Explain
Finally, run the test, and the UI test should pass, as seen in Figure 4.6:
Figure 4.6 – Tests passing
Figure 4.6 – Tests passing

How it works…
We created the contentLoginForTest that can help us verify our navigation. That is, when a user enters a valid username and password, they can navigate to a home screen. Furthermore, we created launchRegisterScreenWithNavGraph(), a helper function that creates the testing graph for our navigation test case.

If you are using FragmentScenario, there are great tips for testing your navigation that you can see here: https://developer.android.com/guide/navigation/navigation-testing.

| [ 03.c3 Handling the UI ](/packtpub/2307a_modern_android_13_230811/03_c3-handling_the_ui) | 👈 04.c4 Navigation in Modern Android Development 👉 |  [ 05.c5 Using DataStore to ](/packtpub/2307a_modern_android_13_230811/05_c5-using_datastore_to) |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|

